Blockchain as a viable data processing technology
=================================================

Introduction
------------

On the 31st of October 2008[^1] Satoshi Nakamoto published a ground-breaking
paper titled, *Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System* (Nakamoto, 2009).
The paper proposed a solution to the double-spending problem using a
peer-to-peer network (DxChain, 2018). With that proposition Satoshi draws the
world’s attention to the fact that he/she has found a way to solve a
contemporary technological problem, which holds the potential to induce a
seismic shift in the landscape of fiat money. In other words, an electronic
peer-to-peer version of an online payment system, which enables the transfer of
digital assets (in particular, those of monetary value) directly from one party
to another without going through a central financial institution (CB Insights,
2018).

[^1]: The mystery surrounding Satoshi Nakamoto is eerie enough but, the fact
that his/her seminal paper was published on Halloween makes it even more freaky.

The following literature review considers various sources of literature, which
range from books, online as well as published articles and blogs that were
written and published during the last decade. With blockchain being such a young
and deeply untapped technology, it is only fair to pay close attention to a
variety of contemporary voices on the subject itself.

Cryptocurrencies are born
-------------------------

In the aftermath of Satoshi’s paper a plethora of digital currencies exploded
onto the scene and threatened the stability of the world’s banking systems
(Tarud, 2019). Between 2008 and 2018 the world witnessed the rise and fall of
the crypto giants. Everyday seemed to bring with it a new cryptocurrency such as
UFOCoin, PizzaCoin, EvilCoin, BongCoin and InsaneCoin. Insane indeed, as the
Winklevoss twins became Bitcoin billionaires when Bitcoin reached the ridiculous
peak of \$19,783.21(US) on December 17, 2018.

Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT)
-----------------------------------

Whilst the fever pitched hype around Bitcoin et al. was running at full steam
not many realized that the true technological hero of the moment was the
underlying DLT named, Blockchain (Wikipedia, 2019a). Blockchain was indeed the
solution to the double-spending problem that Satoshi referred to in his/her
infamous paper. In the aftermath of the crypto currency crash, whilst
overzealous punters where drowning their sorrows in Bourbon as they prepared
themselves to inform their wives that they “invested” Johnny’s college fund into
oblivion on the cryptocurrency market and that they had to hand the Mustang keys
over to the bank, the world started noticing Blockchain (Lee, 2018). Suddenly,
Blockchain was the new kid on the block. Forgotten where the days of frivolous
crypto currency investments. No, that was only the warmup run to the real race –
immutable, distributed ledgers.

Nirvana
-------

With the idea of recording transactions in a ledger that is both distributed and
immutable, the world’s hype talkers could not resist to start the next wave of
innovative ideas such as transparent and un-rigged elections (Somvanshi, 2018),
smart contracts (Wikipedia, 2019d), fraud prevention (Szrama, 2017), a
regulatory technology to enforce the law (João Pedro Quintais, 2018), etc.
Blockchain became the tool of choice with which humanity would solve all its
social, economic and environmental problems – it literally became a god idea.
Not just that, it also placed a huge band-aid on the scar that all those crypto
currency losses incurred on our souls.

Reality
-------

As investors and technologists started taking a closer look at blockchain, they
realized that it is indeed an idea with plenty of potential. They realised that
the underlying components of blockchain, which is cryptography, P2P network,
consensus mechanism, ledger and validity rules are indeed solid, mature
technologies. They then realised that these technologies, used collaboratively,
could enable companies to reduce the trust between stakeholders, build a secure
value transfer system, streamline business processes across multiple entities or
increase record transparency and ease of audibility (Hileman, 2017).

Myths
-----

Unfortunately, as the realists where making in-roads into understanding the true
potential of Blockchain, some misguided ideas started to emanate around
Blockchain. The idea that Blockchains are \`trustless\` started to surface
(Jiang, 2018). Although blockchains may help reduce the need for trust, they do
not completely remove the need for trust. Trust, at a minimum, can be placed in
the underlying cryptography, but trust should also be placed in the operators
and validators. At best, blockchains are trust-minimizing (Hileman, 2017).
Blockchain was also thought to be immutable and tamper-proof (Doubleday, 2018).
This would seem to be the truth – after all, the great Satoshi evangelized it in
his original paper. Unfortunately, the concept of absolute immutability is only
a pipe-dream – it does not exist (DxChain, 2018). The illusion that blockchain
transactions are absolute immutable originates from the appends-only data
structure, which suggests that data can only by added on and not removed. In
theory, blocks comprising transactions can be reversed if enough nodes decide to
collude (Dourado, 2013). Yes, it is a very specific condition under which it
could happen - but still, it is possible. The next myth stems from blockchain’s
underlying cryptography technology. Cryptography creates the illusion that
blockchain is 100% secure. The mere application of cryptography, however, does
not automatically make the system more secure per se. Encrypted data is only as
secure as the private key with which it was encrypted. Thus, compromising the
private key of network participants could give attackers full access to the
shared database and the ability to reverse transaction history. The last myth is
the idea that blockchains are indeed truth machines (Gazdecki, 2018). Blockchain
is well suited to the transfer of data native to the blockchain, e.g. crypto
currency. But when it comes to the tracking of real-world objects, there is no
way that blockchain can physically verify that the physical inputs from the
outside world is correct. Therefore, every blockchain, which uses non-native
digital assets are susceptible to the quality of data that it is entrusted with.

What are the true applications of Blockchain?
---------------------------------------------

A large portion of the literature available on blockchain touts on about the
financial and nonfinancial applications of blockchain. Thus far (AD 2019), the
only real successful and commercial *en masse* application of blockchain has
been cryptocurrency. Every other industry is currently investing unholy amounts
of money in blockchain R&D in the hope that it might transform their own sectors
into the next ultra-optimized, sanitized and transparent industry. Granted, a
few players have claimed to implement blockchain successfully in terms of
tracking physical commodities such as diamonds through complex supply chains
(Iansiti & Lakhani, 2017). It is also claimed that such technology is now
available off-the-shelf. The diamond industry, mainly controlled by large
self-serving conglomerates, happens to be a very powerful and financially strong
industry and it is in its own interest that it could, with mass funding and the
sheer will to protect its assets, successfully implement a blockchain supported
supply chain. Many industries want to or would like to implement blockchain
solutions but lack the funding to do so. It is important to note that the will
of an industry to implement a blockchain solution is directly proportional to
the financial backing it has i.e. money breeds boldness. From this, the very
important question arises - where does the real incentive lie of a blockchain?
Does it lie in monetary value? Does it lie in social change? Does it lie in
political accountability?

With the realization that the backing of funds is needed to pursue bold
blockchain solutions, it circles us back to the question - which type of
commodity is most naturally tracked by the underlying blockchain? The answer to
that is – it’s most native digital asset, cryptocurrency. Or at least, a digital
asset. The synergy is so strong between blockchain technology and cryptocurrency
that one must agree that crypto currency (the funding) was the main
idea/force/value proposition that drove the idea and the implementation of
blockchain into reality.

The next true application of blockchain technology, in the author’s opinion,
will be smart contracts. Again, smart contracts are the closest digital entity
to the blockchain’s native digital asset. In other words, smart contracts are a
digital entity, which controls native digital assets of a blockchain.

What are the true threats imposed by blockchain?
------------------------------------------------

What is money really these days? It is nothing more than a number in a database.
Throughout history the value of money in banks were backed by the Gold Standard
(Wikipedia, 2019c). During the last century the emphasis has moved from the Gold
Standard to the ownership of the ledger, which holds the records of the
distribution of money. Those ledgers are currently held by the banks and with
that they hold the power over money. Blockchain challenges that status quo.
Blockchain threatens the current world order with the possibility that centrally
controlled ledgers of wealth distribution will be distributed amongst the
general populace. The mere possibility of this shook banks to their cores. With
that possibility banks started looking into blockchain technology not only as a
way of holding onto the ledger but also as an active technology whereby
information is processed.

Blockchain as a viable information processing technology
--------------------------------------------------------

If blockchain technology is eventually going to be everything that it promises
to be, then society should take its capability to process data seriously. In an
age where speed, accuracy, security and cost is evermore demanded, blockchain
seems to be an inconsistent fit on at least two of the latter mentioned aspects
– speed and cost (iryna.pavlenko, 2018). In an era of big data, we have come to
take for granted the sheer volume of data we generate daily. Every digital move
we make generates data and it is estimated that we generate a jaw-dropping [2.5
quintillion bytes of
data](https://www.domo.com/learn/data-never-sleeps-5?aid=ogsm072517_1&sf100871281=1)
each day! (Marr, 2018). With every industry vying to break into blockchain
technology, we must realise that soon a large portion of that 2.5 quintillion
bytes will have to be processed through blockchains. The initial version of
Satoshi’s blockchain had several plaguing problems in terms of processing speed
and scalability. Although huge strides have been made in optimising blockchain
technology on those two fronts, there unfortunately still lies a very long road
ahead of us until blockchain would be capable of processing mega-amounts of data
seamlessly (Harris, 2018). Satoshi, in his/her infinite wisdom (and probably
being a prolific Sudoku puzzle solver and Go player), ordained that the
fundamental mechanism with which to overcome the double-spending problem would
be to computationally solve a very complex mathematical puzzle. To the author,
it is herein (the same mechanism that unlocked this technological marvel), that
lies its biggest impediment – processing power. Unfortunately, processing power
does not stand alone in life. No, it has a friend, and it is called, “cost”.
Processing power and cost goes together and serves a double whammy to
blockchain. The more data a blockchain processes the higher its demand for
computational power rises and the more computational power you throw at solving
block hashes, the more energy is consumed and hence the cost rises. It is really
an O(N2) problem, or at least an O(NlogN) problem. This latter notion should be
really appalling to the environmentalists and the energy sector who is eager to
exploit blockchain as an IoT data processing platform (Wildenberg, 2018). The
only real winners in that instance would be the solar panel manufacturers.

Conclusion
----------

Who knows what the future holds? Maybe humanity will eventually, in the far
future, be able to build a Dyson Sphere whereby they can generate enough power
to sustain a blockchain information driven world (Wikipedia, 2019b). Or, maybe,
Satoshi’s grandchild - Satotti, will mysteriously post a blockchain 2.0 on the
internet, which solves all these niggly little problems of speed, scalability
and cost that pesters blockchain 1.0. Satoshi might have pointed the way to the
promised land after he stepped down the mountain with blockchain safely tucked
in under his arm. But, unfortunately, shortly after Satoshi’s decent from his
cognitive Jnana, the children of techno-valley got distracted, bowed down and
worshipped the golden calf called, BitCoin. Since then, the cryptonites have
been wondering the barren desert of “proof-of-concept”, whilst feeding off
MannaCoin.

Currently, blockchain promises a lot but delivers very little besides crypto
currencies. Blockchain as a data processing technology has a long way to go. For
instance, it cannot really support any ETL features. Any data derived from
blockchain can be changed and re-interpreted and re-used, which renders its
immutability aspect useless. In other word, how do we derive trustworthy
analytical insight from blockchain without the need for re-validating derived
data. As a future data scientist, the author takes note of blockchain and
acknowledge that it currently and in the short-term future will have only a
small impact on data science.

Other than that, with Satoshi[^2] still MIA, the immediate blockchain aspects we
can bargain on currently are security and transparency. With those two entities
humanity can tackle a larger problem at hand, corruption and as such instil a
culture of due diligence. Who knows, we might still get to that promised land –
I just hope it won’t take us forty years.

[^2]: The author admits that his infatuation with Satoshi is something that
might drive him into full-time investigative journalism one day…

Bibliography
------------

CB Insights. (2018, December 12). How Blockchain Could Disrupt Banking.
Retrieved June 10, 2019, from CB Insights Research website:
https://www.cbinsights.com/research/blockchain-disrupting-banking/

Doubleday, K. (2018, November 9). Why Blockchain Immutability Matters. Retrieved
May 13, 2019, from Hacker Noon website:
https://hackernoon.com/why-blockchain-immutability-matters-8ce86603914e

Dourado, E. (2013, December 4). Stop Saying Bitcoin Transactions Aren’t
Reversible. Retrieved May 13, 2019, from Eli Dourado website:
https://blog.elidourado.com/stop-saying-bitcoin-transactions-arent-reversible-51a74003e226

DxChain. (2018, August 13). A Deep Understanding of the Double-Spending Problem
in Bitcoin. Retrieved June 10, 2019, from Medium website:
https://medium.com/dxchainglobal/a-deep-understanding-of-the-double-spending-problem-in-bitcoin-86b73aaefc36

Gazdecki, A. (2018). How Secure Is Blockchain Technology? Retrieved May 13,
2019, from Forbes website:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2018/10/12/how-secure-is-blockchain-technology/

Harris, A. (2018). When You Hear Blockchain Isn’t Ready For Scale, Here’s What
That Means. Retrieved May 14, 2019, from Forbes website:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2018/05/22/when-you-hear-blockchain-isnt-ready-for-scale-heres-what-that-means/

Hileman, G. (2017). Global Blockchain Benchmarking Study (2017), Hileman &
Rauchs - J2 Capital. Retrieved May 4, 2019, from
https://j2-capital.com/global-blockchain-benchmarking

Iansiti, M., & Lakhani, K. R. (2017, January 1). The Truth About Blockchain.
*Harvard Business Review*, (January–February 2017). Retrieved from
https://hbr.org/2017/01/the-truth-about-blockchain

iryna.pavlenko. (2018, November 28). Blockchain Scalability: Main Problems and
Solutions. Retrieved May 14, 2019, from Applicature website:
https://applicature.com/blog/blockchain-technology/blockchain-scalability

Jiang, L. (2018, December 13). The Age of Trust — the problem blockchain solves
that others cannot. Retrieved May 13, 2019, from Medium website:
https://medium.com/swlh/the-age-of-trust-the-problem-blockchain-solves-that-others-cannot-6024ebf47cad

João Pedro Quintais, P. R. at the U. of A. (2018). *Blockchain and the Law: A
Critical Evaluation*. Retrieved from
https://stanford-jblp.pubpub.org/pub/blockchain-and-law-evaluation

Lee, N. P. and S.-H. (2018, August 20). After the bitcoin boom: hard lessons for
cryptocurrency investors. Retrieved June 10, 2019, from CNBC website:
https://www.cnbc.com/2018/08/20/after-the-bitcoin-boom-hard-lessons-for-cryptocurrency-investors.html

Marr, B. (2018). How Much Data Do We Create Every Day? The Mind-Blowing Stats
Everyone Should Read. Retrieved May 14, 2019, from Forbes website:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2018/05/21/how-much-data-do-we-create-every-day-the-mind-blowing-stats-everyone-should-read/

Nakamoto, S. (2009). Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.
*Cryptography Mailing List at Https://Metzdowd.Com*.

Somvanshi, K. C. D. and K. K. (2018, May 30). How blockchain could improve
election transparency. Retrieved May 13, 2019, from Brookings website:
https://www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2018/05/30/how-blockchain-could-improve-election-transparency/

Szrama, G. (2017, November 27). The Promise of Blockchain. Retrieved May 13,
2019, from Contingencies Magazine website:
http://contingencies.org/the-promise-of-blockchain/

Tarud, J. (2019, February 4). Is Traditional Banking Under Threat from
Cryptocurrency? Retrieved May 13, 2019, from
https://www.koombea.com/blog/cryptocurrency/

Wikipedia. (2019a). Blockchain. In *Wikipedia*. Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Blockchain&oldid=895749643

Wikipedia. (2019b). Dyson sphere. In *Wikipedia*. Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dyson_sphere&oldid=895774561

Wikipedia. (2019c). Gold standard. In *Wikipedia*. Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gold_standard&oldid=896409206

Wikipedia. (2019d). Smart contract. In *Wikipedia*. Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Smart_contract&oldid=885797530

Wildenberg. (2018, August 11). Blockchain & Sustainability. Retrieved May 14,
2019, from BlockchainHub website:
https://blockchainhub.net/blog/blog/blockchain-sustainability-programming-a-sustainable-world/
